<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 27</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      IV
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     &lsquo;I won&rsquo;t have none of your weevily wheat,
      and I won&rsquo;t have none of your barley,
     But I&rsquo;ll take a measure of fine white
      flour, to make a cake for Charley.&rsquo; 
</pre>
    <p>
      WE WERE SINGING rhymes to tease Antonia while she was beating up one of
      Charley&rsquo;s favourite cakes in her big mixing-bowl.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a crisp autumn evening, just cold enough to make one glad to quit
      playing tag in the yard, and retreat into the kitchen. We had begun to
      roll popcorn balls with syrup when we heard a knock at the back door, and
      Tony dropped her spoon and went to open it.
    </p>
    <p>
      A plump, fair-skinned girl was standing in the doorway. She looked demure
      and pretty, and made a graceful picture in her blue cashmere dress and
      little blue hat, with a plaid shawl drawn neatly about her shoulders and a
      clumsy pocket-book in her hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Hello, Tony. Don&rsquo;t you know me?&rsquo; she asked in a smooth, low voice,
      looking in at us archly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Antonia gasped and stepped back.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Why, it&rsquo;s Lena! Of course I didn&rsquo;t know you, so dressed up!&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Lena Lingard laughed, as if this pleased her. I had not recognized her for
      a moment, either. I had never seen her before with a hat on her head&mdash;or
      with shoes and stockings on her feet, for that matter. And here she was,
      brushed and smoothed and dressed like a town girl, smiling at us with
      perfect composure.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Hello, Jim,&rsquo; she said carelessly as she walked into the kitchen and
      looked about her. &lsquo;I&rsquo;ve come to town to work, too, Tony.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Have you, now? Well, ain&rsquo;t that funny!&rsquo; Antonia stood ill at ease, and
      didn&rsquo;t seem to know just what to do with her visitor.
    </p>
    <p>
      The door was open into the dining-room, where Mrs. Harling sat crocheting
      and Frances was reading. Frances asked Lena to come in and join them.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;You are Lena Lingard, aren&rsquo;t you? I&rsquo;ve been to see your mother, but you
      were off herding cattle that day. Mama, this is Chris Lingard&rsquo;s oldest
      girl.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Harling dropped her worsted and examined the visitor with quick, keen
      eyes. Lena was not at all disconcerted. She sat down in the chair Frances
      pointed out, carefully arranging her pocket-book and grey cotton gloves on
      her lap. We followed with our popcorn, but Antonia hung back&mdash;said
      she had to get her cake into the oven.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;So you have come to town,&rsquo; said Mrs. Harling, her eyes still fixed on
      Lena. &lsquo;Where are you working?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;For Mrs. Thomas, the dressmaker. She is going to teach me to sew. She
      says I have quite a knack. I&rsquo;m through with the farm. There ain&rsquo;t any end
      to the work on a farm, and always so much trouble happens. I&rsquo;m going to be
      a dressmaker.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Well, there have to be dressmakers. It&rsquo;s a good trade. But I wouldn&rsquo;t run
      down the farm, if I were you,&rsquo; said Mrs. Harling rather severely. &lsquo;How is
      your mother?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Oh, mother&rsquo;s never very well; she has too much to do. She&rsquo;d get away from
      the farm, too, if she could. She was willing for me to come. After I learn
      to do sewing, I can make money and help her.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;See that you don&rsquo;t forget to,&rsquo; said Mrs. Harling sceptically, as she took
      up her crocheting again and sent the hook in and out with nimble fingers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;No, &lsquo;m, I won&rsquo;t,&rsquo; said Lena blandly. She took a few grains of the popcorn
      we pressed upon her, eating them discreetly and taking care not to get her
      fingers sticky.
    </p>
    <p>
      Frances drew her chair up nearer to the visitor. &lsquo;I thought you were going
      to be married, Lena,&rsquo; she said teasingly. &lsquo;Didn&rsquo;t I hear that Nick
      Svendsen was rushing you pretty hard?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Lena looked up with her curiously innocent smile. &lsquo;He did go with me quite
      a while. But his father made a fuss about it and said he wouldn&rsquo;t give
      Nick any land if he married me, so he&rsquo;s going to marry Annie Iverson. I
      wouldn&rsquo;t like to be her; Nick&rsquo;s awful sullen, and he&rsquo;ll take it out on
      her. He ain&rsquo;t spoke to his father since he promised.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Frances laughed. &lsquo;And how do you feel about it?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I don&rsquo;t want to marry Nick, or any other man,&rsquo; Lena murmured. &lsquo;I&rsquo;ve seen
      a good deal of married life, and I don&rsquo;t care for it. I want to be so I
      can help my mother and the children at home, and not have to ask lief of
      anybody.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;That&rsquo;s right,&rsquo; said Frances. &lsquo;And Mrs. Thomas thinks you can learn
      dressmaking?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Yes, &lsquo;m. I&rsquo;ve always liked to sew, but I never had much to do with. Mrs.
      Thomas makes lovely things for all the town ladies. Did you know Mrs.
      Gardener is having a purple velvet made? The velvet came from Omaha. My,
      but it&rsquo;s lovely!&rsquo; Lena sighed softly and stroked her cashmere folds. &lsquo;Tony
      knows I never did like out-of-door work,&rsquo; she added.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Harling glanced at her. &lsquo;I expect you&rsquo;ll learn to sew all right,
      Lena, if you&rsquo;ll only keep your head and not go gadding about to dances all
      the time and neglect your work, the way some country girls do.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Yes, &lsquo;m. Tiny Soderball is coming to town, too. She&rsquo;s going to work at
      the Boys&rsquo; Home Hotel. She&rsquo;ll see lots of strangers,&rsquo; Lena added wistfully.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Too many, like enough,&rsquo; said Mrs. Harling. &lsquo;I don&rsquo;t think a hotel is a
      good place for a girl; though I guess Mrs. Gardener keeps an eye on her
      waitresses.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Lena&rsquo;s candid eyes, that always looked a little sleepy under their long
      lashes, kept straying about the cheerful rooms with naive admiration.
      Presently she drew on her cotton gloves. &lsquo;I guess I must be leaving,&rsquo; she
      said irresolutely.
    </p>
    <p>
      Frances told her to come again, whenever she was lonesome or wanted advice
      about anything. Lena replied that she didn&rsquo;t believe she would ever get
      lonesome in Black Hawk.
    </p>
    <p>
      She lingered at the kitchen door and begged Antonia to come and see her
      often. &lsquo;I&rsquo;ve got a room of my own at Mrs. Thomas&rsquo;s, with a carpet.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Tony shuffled uneasily in her cloth slippers. &lsquo;I&rsquo;ll come sometime, but
      Mrs. Harling don&rsquo;t like to have me run much,&rsquo; she said evasively.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;You can do what you please when you go out, can&rsquo;t you?&rsquo; Lena asked in a
      guarded whisper. &lsquo;Ain&rsquo;t you crazy about town, Tony? I don&rsquo;t care what
      anybody says, I&rsquo;m done with the farm!&rsquo; She glanced back over her shoulder
      toward the dining-room, where Mrs. Harling sat.
    </p>
    <p>
      When Lena was gone, Frances asked Antonia why she hadn&rsquo;t been a little
      more cordial to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I didn&rsquo;t know if your mother would like her coming here,&rsquo; said Antonia,
      looking troubled. &lsquo;She was kind of talked about, out there.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Yes, I know. But mother won&rsquo;t hold it against her if she behaves well
      here. You needn&rsquo;t say anything about that to the children. I guess Jim has
      heard all that gossip?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      When I nodded, she pulled my hair and told me I knew too much, anyhow. We
      were good friends, Frances and I.
    </p>
    <p>
      I ran home to tell grandmother that Lena Lingard had come to town. We were
      glad of it, for she had a hard life on the farm.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lena lived in the Norwegian settlement west of Squaw Creek, and she used
      to herd her father&rsquo;s cattle in the open country between his place and the
      Shimerdas&rsquo;. Whenever we rode over in that direction we saw her out among
      her cattle, bareheaded and barefooted, scantily dressed in tattered
      clothing, always knitting as she watched her herd. Before I knew Lena, I
      thought of her as something wild, that always lived on the prairie,
      because I had never seen her under a roof. Her yellow hair was burned to a
      ruddy thatch on her head; but her legs and arms, curiously enough, in
      spite of constant exposure to the sun, kept a miraculous whiteness which
      somehow made her seem more undressed than other girls who went scantily
      clad. The first time I stopped to talk to her, I was astonished at her
      soft voice and easy, gentle ways. The girls out there usually got rough
      and mannish after they went to herding. But Lena asked Jake and me to get
      off our horses and stay awhile, and behaved exactly as if she were in a
      house and were accustomed to having visitors. She was not embarrassed by
      her ragged clothes, and treated us as if we were old acquaintances. Even
      then I noticed the unusual colour of her eyes&mdash;a shade of deep violet&mdash;and
      their soft, confiding expression.
    </p>
    <p>
      Chris Lingard was not a very successful farmer, and he had a large family.
      Lena was always knitting stockings for little brothers and sisters, and
      even the Norwegian women, who disapproved of her, admitted that she was a
      good daughter to her mother. As Tony said, she had been talked about. She
      was accused of making Ole Benson lose the little sense he had&mdash;and
      that at an age when she should still have been in pinafores.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ole lived in a leaky dugout somewhere at the edge of the settlement. He
      was fat and lazy and discouraged, and bad luck had become a habit with
      him. After he had had every other kind of misfortune, his wife, &lsquo;Crazy
      Mary,&rsquo; tried to set a neighbour&rsquo;s barn on fire, and was sent to the asylum
      at Lincoln. She was kept there for a few months, then escaped and walked
      all the way home, nearly two hundred miles, travelling by night and hiding
      in barns and haystacks by day. When she got back to the Norwegian
      settlement, her poor feet were as hard as hoofs. She promised to be good,
      and was allowed to stay at home&mdash;though everyone realized she was as
      crazy as ever, and she still ran about barefooted through the snow,
      telling her domestic troubles to her neighbours.
    </p>
    <p>
      Not long after Mary came back from the asylum, I heard a young Dane, who
      was helping us to thresh, tell Jake and Otto that Chris Lingard&rsquo;s oldest
      girl had put Ole Benson out of his head, until he had no more sense than
      his crazy wife. When Ole was cultivating his corn that summer, he used to
      get discouraged in the field, tie up his team, and wander off to wherever
      Lena Lingard was herding. There he would sit down on the drawside and help
      her watch her cattle. All the settlement was talking about it. The
      Norwegian preacher&rsquo;s wife went to Lena and told her she ought not to allow
      this; she begged Lena to come to church on Sundays. Lena said she hadn&rsquo;t a
      dress in the world any less ragged than the one on her back. Then the
      minister&rsquo;s wife went through her old trunks and found some things she had
      worn before her marriage.
    </p>
    <p>
      The next Sunday Lena appeared at church, a little late, with her hair done
      up neatly on her head, like a young woman, wearing shoes and stockings,
      and the new dress, which she had made over for herself very becomingly.
      The congregation stared at her. Until that morning no one&mdash;unless it
      were Ole&mdash;had realized how pretty she was, or that she was growing
      up. The swelling lines of her figure had been hidden under the shapeless
      rags she wore in the fields. After the last hymn had been sung, and the
      congregation was dismissed, Ole slipped out to the hitch-bar and lifted
      Lena on her horse. That, in itself, was shocking; a married man was not
      expected to do such things. But it was nothing to the scene that followed.
      Crazy Mary darted out from the group of women at the church door, and ran
      down the road after Lena, shouting horrible threats.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Look out, you Lena Lingard, look out! I&rsquo;ll come over with a corn-knife
      one day and trim some of that shape off you. Then you won&rsquo;t sail round so
      fine, making eyes at the men!...&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      The Norwegian women didn&rsquo;t know where to look. They were formal
      housewives, most of them, with a severe sense of decorum. But Lena Lingard
      only laughed her lazy, good-natured laugh and rode on, gazing back over
      her shoulder at Ole&rsquo;s infuriated wife.
    </p>
    <p>
      The time came, however, when Lena didn&rsquo;t laugh. More than once Crazy Mary
      chased her across the prairie and round and round the Shimerdas&rsquo; 
      cornfield. Lena never told her father; perhaps she was ashamed; perhaps
      she was more afraid of his anger than of the corn-knife. I was at the
      Shimerdas&rsquo; one afternoon when Lena came bounding through the red grass as
      fast as her white legs could carry her. She ran straight into the house
      and hid in Antonia&rsquo;s feather-bed. Mary was not far behind: she came right
      up to the door and made us feel how sharp her blade was, showing us very
      graphically just what she meant to do to Lena. Mrs. Shimerda, leaning out
      of the window, enjoyed the situation keenly, and was sorry when Antonia
      sent Mary away, mollified by an apronful of bottle-tomatoes. Lena came out
      from Tony&rsquo;s room behind the kitchen, very pink from the heat of the
      feathers, but otherwise calm. She begged Antonia and me to go with her,
      and help get her cattle together; they were scattered and might be gorging
      themselves in somebody&rsquo;s cornfield.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Maybe you lose a steer and learn not to make somethings with your eyes at
      married men,&rsquo; Mrs. Shimerda told her hectoringly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lena only smiled her sleepy smile. &lsquo;I never made anything to him with my
      eyes. I can&rsquo;t help it if he hangs around, and I can&rsquo;t order him off. It
      ain&rsquo;t my prairie.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0027" id="link2H_4_0027">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
</section></body></html>