<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 45</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-45" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      I
    </h2>
    <p>
      TWO YEARS AFTER I left Lincoln, I completed my academic course at Harvard.
      Before I entered the Law School I went home for the summer vacation. On
      the night of my arrival, Mrs. Harling and Frances and Sally came over to
      greet me. Everything seemed just as it used to be. My grandparents looked
      very little older. Frances Harling was married now, and she and her
      husband managed the Harling interests in Black Hawk. When we gathered in
      grandmother&rsquo;s parlour, I could hardly believe that I had been away at all.
      One subject, however, we avoided all evening.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I was walking home with Frances, after we had left Mrs. Harling at
      her gate, she said simply, &lsquo;You know, of course, about poor Antonia.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Poor Antonia! Everyone would be saying that now, I thought bitterly. I
      replied that grandmother had written me how Antonia went away to marry
      Larry Donovan at some place where he was working; that he had deserted
      her, and that there was now a baby. This was all I knew.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;He never married her,&rsquo; Frances said. &lsquo;I haven&rsquo;t seen her since she came
      back. She lives at home, on the farm, and almost never comes to town. She
      brought the baby in to show it to mama once. I&rsquo;m afraid she&rsquo;s settled down
      to be Ambrosch&rsquo;s drudge for good.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      I tried to shut Antonia out of my mind. I was bitterly disappointed in
      her. I could not forgive her for becoming an object of pity, while Lena
      Lingard, for whom people had always foretold trouble, was now the leading
      dressmaker of Lincoln, much respected in Black Hawk. Lena gave her heart
      away when she felt like it, but she kept her head for her business and had
      got on in the world.
    </p>
    <p>
      Just then it was the fashion to speak indulgently of Lena and severely of
      Tiny Soderball, who had quietly gone West to try her fortune the year
      before. A Black Hawk boy, just back from Seattle, brought the news that
      Tiny had not gone to the coast on a venture, as she had allowed people to
      think, but with very definite plans. One of the roving promoters that used
      to stop at Mrs. Gardener&rsquo;s hotel owned idle property along the waterfront
      in Seattle, and he had offered to set Tiny up in business in one of his
      empty buildings. She was now conducting a sailors&rsquo; lodging-house. This,
      everyone said, would be the end of Tiny. Even if she had begun by running
      a decent place, she couldn&rsquo;t keep it up; all sailors&rsquo; boarding-houses were
      alike.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I thought about it, I discovered that I had never known Tiny as well
      as I knew the other girls. I remembered her tripping briskly about the
      dining-room on her high heels, carrying a big trayful of dishes, glancing
      rather pertly at the spruce travelling men, and contemptuously at the
      scrubby ones&mdash;who were so afraid of her that they didn&rsquo;t dare to ask
      for two kinds of pie. Now it occurred to me that perhaps the sailors, too,
      might be afraid of Tiny. How astonished we should have been, as we sat
      talking about her on Frances Harling&rsquo;s front porch, if we could have known
      what her future was really to be! Of all the girls and boys who grew up
      together in Black Hawk, Tiny Soderball was to lead the most adventurous
      life and to achieve the most solid worldly success.
    </p>
    <p>
      This is what actually happened to Tiny: While she was running her
      lodging-house in Seattle, gold was discovered in Alaska. Miners and
      sailors came back from the North with wonderful stories and pouches of
      gold. Tiny saw it and weighed it in her hands. That daring, which nobody
      had ever suspected in her, awoke. She sold her business and set out for
      Circle City, in company with a carpenter and his wife whom she had
      persuaded to go along with her. They reached Skaguay in a snowstorm, went
      in dog-sledges over the Chilkoot Pass, and shot the Yukon in flatboats.
      They reached Circle City on the very day when some Siwash Indians came
      into the settlement with the report that there had been a rich gold strike
      farther up the river, on a certain Klondike Creek. Two days later Tiny and
      her friends, and nearly everyone else in Circle City, started for the
      Klondike fields on the last steamer that went up the Yukon before it froze
      for the winter. That boatload of people founded Dawson City. Within a few
      weeks there were fifteen hundred homeless men in camp. Tiny and the
      carpenter&rsquo;s wife began to cook for them, in a tent. The miners gave her a
      building lot, and the carpenter put up a log hotel for her. There she
      sometimes fed a hundred and fifty men a day. Miners came in on snowshoes
      from their placer claims twenty miles away to buy fresh bread from her,
      and paid for it in gold.
    </p>
    <p>
      That winter Tiny kept in her hotel a Swede whose legs had been frozen one
      night in a storm when he was trying to find his way back to his cabin. The
      poor fellow thought it great good fortune to be cared for by a woman, and
      a woman who spoke his own tongue. When he was told that his feet must be
      amputated, he said he hoped he would not get well; what could a
      working-man do in this hard world without feet? He did, in fact, die from
      the operation, but not before he had deeded Tiny Soderball his claim on
      Hunker Creek. Tiny sold her hotel, invested half her money in Dawson
      building lots, and with the rest she developed her claim. She went off
      into the wilds and lived on the claim. She bought other claims from
      discouraged miners, traded or sold them on percentages.
    </p>
    <p>
      After nearly ten years in the Klondike, Tiny returned, with a considerable
      fortune, to live in San Francisco. I met her in Salt Lake City in 1908.
      She was a thin, hard-faced woman, very well-dressed, very reserved in
      manner. Curiously enough, she reminded me of Mrs. Gardener, for whom she
      had worked in Black Hawk so long ago. She told me about some of the
      desperate chances she had taken in the gold country, but the thrill of
      them was quite gone. She said frankly that nothing interested her much now
      but making money. The only two human beings of whom she spoke with any
      feeling were the Swede, Johnson, who had given her his claim, and Lena
      Lingard. She had persuaded Lena to come to San Francisco and go into
      business there.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Lincoln was never any place for her,&rsquo; Tiny remarked. &lsquo;In a town of that
      size Lena would always be gossiped about. Frisco&rsquo;s the right field for
      her. She has a fine class of trade. Oh, she&rsquo;s just the same as she always
      was! She&rsquo;s careless, but she&rsquo;s level-headed. She&rsquo;s the only person I know
      who never gets any older. It&rsquo;s fine for me to have her there; somebody who
      enjoys things like that. She keeps an eye on me and won&rsquo;t let me be
      shabby. When she thinks I need a new dress, she makes it and sends it home
      with a bill that&rsquo;s long enough, I can tell you!&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Tiny limped slightly when she walked. The claim on Hunker Creek took toll
      from its possessors. Tiny had been caught in a sudden turn of weather,
      like poor Johnson. She lost three toes from one of those pretty little
      feet that used to trip about Black Hawk in pointed slippers and striped
      stockings. Tiny mentioned this mutilation quite casually&mdash;didn&rsquo;t seem
      sensitive about it. She was satisfied with her success, but not elated.
      She was like someone in whom the faculty of becoming interested is worn
      out.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0045" id="link2H_4_0045">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
</section></body></html>