<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      XIII
    </h2>
    <p>
      THE WEEK FOLLOWING Christmas brought in a thaw, and by New Year&rsquo;s Day all
      the world about us was a broth of grey slush, and the guttered slope
      between the windmill and the barn was running black water. The soft black
      earth stood out in patches along the roadsides. I resumed all my chores,
      carried in the cobs and wood and water, and spent the afternoons at the
      barn, watching Jake shell corn with a hand-sheller.
    </p>
    <p>
      One morning, during this interval of fine weather, Antonia and her mother
      rode over on one of their shaggy old horses to pay us a visit. It was the
      first time Mrs. Shimerda had been to our house, and she ran about
      examining our carpets and curtains and furniture, all the while commenting
      upon them to her daughter in an envious, complaining tone. In the kitchen
      she caught up an iron pot that stood on the back of the stove and said:
      &lsquo;You got many, Shimerdas no got.&rsquo; I thought it weak-minded of grandmother
      to give the pot to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      After dinner, when she was helping to wash the dishes, she said, tossing
      her head: &lsquo;You got many things for cook. If I got all things like you, I
      make much better.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      She was a conceited, boastful old thing, and even misfortune could not
      humble her. I was so annoyed that I felt coldly even toward Antonia and
      listened unsympathetically when she told me her father was not well.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;My papa sad for the old country. He not look good. He never make music
      any more. At home he play violin all the time; for weddings and for dance.
      Here never. When I beg him for play, he shake his head no. Some days he
      take his violin out of his box and make with his fingers on the strings,
      like this, but never he make the music. He don&rsquo;t like this kawntree.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;People who don&rsquo;t like this country ought to stay at home,&rsquo; I said
      severely. &lsquo;We don&rsquo;t make them come here.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;He not want to come, never!&rsquo; she burst out. &lsquo;My mamenka make him come.
      All the time she say: &ldquo;America big country; much money, much land for my
      boys, much husband for my girls.&rdquo; My papa, he cry for leave his old
      friends what make music with him. He love very much the man what play the
      long horn like this&rsquo;&mdash;she indicated a slide trombone. &ldquo;They go to
      school together and are friends from boys. But my mama, she want Ambrosch
      for be rich, with many cattle.&rdquo;&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Your mama,&rsquo; I said angrily, &lsquo;wants other people&rsquo;s things.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your grandfather is rich,&rdquo; she retorted fiercely. &lsquo;Why he not help my
      papa? Ambrosch be rich, too, after while, and he pay back. He is very
      smart boy. For Ambrosch my mama come here.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Ambrosch was considered the important person in the family. Mrs. Shimerda
      and Antonia always deferred to him, though he was often surly with them
      and contemptuous toward his father. Ambrosch and his mother had everything
      their own way. Though Antonia loved her father more than she did anyone
      else, she stood in awe of her elder brother.
    </p>
    <p>
      After I watched Antonia and her mother go over the hill on their miserable
      horse, carrying our iron pot with them, I turned to grandmother, who had
      taken up her darning, and said I hoped that snooping old woman wouldn&rsquo;t
      come to see us any more.
    </p>
    <p>
      Grandmother chuckled and drove her bright needle across a hole in Otto&rsquo;s
      sock. &lsquo;She&rsquo;s not old, Jim, though I expect she seems old to you. No, I
      wouldn&rsquo;t mourn if she never came again. But, you see, a body never knows
      what traits poverty might bring out in &lsquo;em. It makes a woman grasping to
      see her children want for things. Now read me a chapter in &ldquo;The Prince of
      the House of David.&rdquo; Let&rsquo;s forget the Bohemians.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      We had three weeks of this mild, open weather. The cattle in the corral
      ate corn almost as fast as the men could shell it for them, and we hoped
      they would be ready for an early market. One morning the two big bulls,
      Gladstone and Brigham Young, thought spring had come, and they began to
      tease and butt at each other across the barbed wire that separated them.
      Soon they got angry. They bellowed and pawed up the soft earth with their
      hoofs, rolling their eyes and tossing their heads. Each withdrew to a far
      corner of his own corral, and then they made for each other at a gallop.
      Thud, thud, we could hear the impact of their great heads, and their
      bellowing shook the pans on the kitchen shelves. Had they not been
      dehorned, they would have torn each other to pieces. Pretty soon the fat
      steers took it up and began butting and horning each other. Clearly, the
      affair had to be stopped. We all stood by and watched admiringly while
      Fuchs rode into the corral with a pitchfork and prodded the bulls again
      and again, finally driving them apart.
    </p>
    <p>
      The big storm of the winter began on my eleventh birthday, the twentieth
      of January. When I went down to breakfast that morning, Jake and Otto came
      in white as snow-men, beating their hands and stamping their feet. They
      began to laugh boisterously when they saw me, calling:
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;You&rsquo;ve got a birthday present this time, Jim, and no mistake. They was a
      full-grown blizzard ordered for you.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      All day the storm went on. The snow did not fall this time, it simply
      spilled out of heaven, like thousands of featherbeds being emptied. That
      afternoon the kitchen was a carpenter-shop; the men brought in their tools
      and made two great wooden shovels with long handles. Neither grandmother
      nor I could go out in the storm, so Jake fed the chickens and brought in a
      pitiful contribution of eggs.
    </p>
    <p>
      Next day our men had to shovel until noon to reach the barn&mdash;and the
      snow was still falling! There had not been such a storm in the ten years
      my grandfather had lived in Nebraska. He said at dinner that we would not
      try to reach the cattle&mdash;they were fat enough to go without their
      corn for a day or two; but tomorrow we must feed them and thaw out their
      water-tap so that they could drink. We could not so much as see the
      corrals, but we knew the steers were over there, huddled together under
      the north bank. Our ferocious bulls, subdued enough by this time, were
      probably warming each other&rsquo;s backs. &lsquo;This&rsquo;ll take the bile out of &lsquo;em!&rsquo; 
      Fuchs remarked gleefully.
    </p>
    <p>
      At noon that day the hens had not been heard from. After dinner Jake and
      Otto, their damp clothes now dried on them, stretched their stiff arms and
      plunged again into the drifts. They made a tunnel through the snow to the
      hen-house, with walls so solid that grandmother and I could walk back and
      forth in it. We found the chickens asleep; perhaps they thought night had
      come to stay. One old rooster was stirring about, pecking at the solid
      lump of ice in their water-tin. When we flashed the lantern in their eyes,
      the hens set up a great cackling and flew about clumsily, scattering
      down-feathers. The mottled, pin-headed guinea-hens, always resentful of
      captivity, ran screeching out into the tunnel and tried to poke their
      ugly, painted faces through the snow walls. By five o&rsquo;clock the chores
      were done just when it was time to begin them all over again! That was a
      strange, unnatural sort of day.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0016" id="link2H_4_0016">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
</section></body></html>