<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 48</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-48" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      IV
    </h2>
    <p>
      THE NEXT AFTERNOON I walked over to the Shimerdas&rsquo;. Yulka showed me the
      baby and told me that Antonia was shocking wheat on the southwest quarter.
      I went down across the fields, and Tony saw me from a long way off. She
      stood still by her shocks, leaning on her pitchfork, watching me as I
      came. We met like the people in the old song, in silence, if not in tears.
      Her warm hand clasped mine.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I thought you&rsquo;d come, Jim. I heard you were at Mrs. Steavens&rsquo;s last
      night. I&rsquo;ve been looking for you all day.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      She was thinner than I had ever seen her, and looked as Mrs. Steavens
      said, &lsquo;worked down,&rsquo; but there was a new kind of strength in the gravity
      of her face, and her colour still gave her that look of deep-seated health
      and ardour. Still? Why, it flashed across me that though so much had
      happened in her life and in mine, she was barely twenty-four years old.
    </p>
    <p>
      Antonia stuck her fork in the ground, and instinctively we walked toward
      that unploughed patch at the crossing of the roads as the fittest place to
      talk to each other. We sat down outside the sagging wire fence that shut
      Mr. Shimerda&rsquo;s plot off from the rest of the world. The tall red grass had
      never been cut there. It had died down in winter and come up again in the
      spring until it was as thick and shrubby as some tropical garden-grass. I
      found myself telling her everything: why I had decided to study law and to
      go into the law office of one of my mother&rsquo;s relatives in New York City;
      about Gaston Cleric&rsquo;s death from pneumonia last winter, and the difference
      it had made in my life. She wanted to know about my friends, and my way of
      living, and my dearest hopes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Of course it means you are going away from us for good,&rsquo; she said with a
      sigh. &lsquo;But that don&rsquo;t mean I&rsquo;ll lose you. Look at my papa here; he&rsquo;s been
      dead all these years, and yet he is more real to me than almost anybody
      else. He never goes out of my life. I talk to him and consult him all the
      time. The older I grow, the better I know him and the more I understand
      him.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      She asked me whether I had learned to like big cities. &lsquo;I&rsquo;d always be
      miserable in a city. I&rsquo;d die of lonesomeness. I like to be where I know
      every stack and tree, and where all the ground is friendly. I want to live
      and die here. Father Kelly says everybody&rsquo;s put into this world for
      something, and I know what I&rsquo;ve got to do. I&rsquo;m going to see that my little
      girl has a better chance than ever I had. I&rsquo;m going to take care of that
      girl, Jim.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      I told her I knew she would. &lsquo;Do you know, Antonia, since I&rsquo;ve been away,
      I think of you more often than of anyone else in this part of the world.
      I&rsquo;d have liked to have you for a sweetheart, or a wife, or my mother or my
      sister&mdash;anything that a woman can be to a man. The idea of you is a
      part of my mind; you influence my likes and dislikes, all my tastes,
      hundreds of times when I don&rsquo;t realize it. You really are a part of me.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      She turned her bright, believing eyes to me, and the tears came up in them
      slowly, &lsquo;How can it be like that, when you know so many people, and when
      I&rsquo;ve disappointed you so? Ain&rsquo;t it wonderful, Jim, how much people can
      mean to each other? I&rsquo;m so glad we had each other when we were little. I
      can&rsquo;t wait till my little girl&rsquo;s old enough to tell her about all the
      things we used to do. You&rsquo;ll always remember me when you think about old
      times, won&rsquo;t you? And I guess everybody thinks about old times, even the
      happiest people.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      As we walked homeward across the fields, the sun dropped and lay like a
      great golden globe in the low west. While it hung there, the moon rose in
      the east, as big as a cart-wheel, pale silver and streaked with rose
      colour, thin as a bubble or a ghost-moon. For five, perhaps ten minutes,
      the two luminaries confronted each other across the level land, resting on
      opposite edges of the world.
    </p>
    <p>
      In that singular light every little tree and shock of wheat, every
      sunflower stalk and clump of snow-on-the-mountain, drew itself up high and
      pointed; the very clods and furrows in the fields seemed to stand up
      sharply. I felt the old pull of the earth, the solemn magic that comes out
      of those fields at nightfall. I wished I could be a little boy again, and
      that my way could end there.
    </p>
    <p>
      We reached the edge of the field, where our ways parted. I took her hands
      and held them against my breast, feeling once more how strong and warm and
      good they were, those brown hands, and remembering how many kind things
      they had done for me. I held them now a long while, over my heart. About
      us it was growing darker and darker, and I had to look hard to see her
      face, which I meant always to carry with me; the closest, realest face,
      under all the shadows of women&rsquo;s faces, at the very bottom of my memory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I&rsquo;ll come back,&rsquo; I said earnestly, through the soft, intrusive darkness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Perhaps you will&rsquo;&mdash;I felt rather than saw her smile. &lsquo;But even if
      you don&rsquo;t, you&rsquo;re here, like my father. So I won&rsquo;t be lonesome.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      As I went back alone over that familiar road, I could almost believe that
      a boy and girl ran along beside me, as our shadows used to do, laughing
      and whispering to each other in the grass.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0048" id="link2H_4_0048">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
</section></body></html>