<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 33</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-33" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      X
    </h2>
    <p>
      IT WAS AT THE Vannis&rsquo; tent that Antonia was discovered. Hitherto she had
      been looked upon more as a ward of the Harlings than as one of the &lsquo;hired
      girls.&rsquo; She had lived in their house and yard and garden; her thoughts
      never seemed to stray outside that little kingdom. But after the tent came
      to town she began to go about with Tiny and Lena and their friends. The
      Vannis often said that Antonia was the best dancer of them all. I
      sometimes heard murmurs in the crowd outside the pavilion that Mrs.
      Harling would soon have her hands full with that girl. The young men began
      to joke with each other about &lsquo;the Harlings&rsquo; Tony&rsquo; as they did about &lsquo;the
      Marshalls&rsquo; Anna&rsquo; or &lsquo;the Gardeners&rsquo; Tiny.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Antonia talked and thought of nothing but the tent. She hummed the dance
      tunes all day. When supper was late, she hurried with her dishes, dropped
      and smashed them in her excitement. At the first call of the music, she
      became irresponsible. If she hadn&rsquo;t time to dress, she merely flung off
      her apron and shot out of the kitchen door. Sometimes I went with her; the
      moment the lighted tent came into view she would break into a run, like a
      boy. There were always partners waiting for her; she began to dance before
      she got her breath.
    </p>
    <p>
      Antonia&rsquo;s success at the tent had its consequences. The iceman lingered
      too long now, when he came into the covered porch to fill the
      refrigerator. The delivery boys hung about the kitchen when they brought
      the groceries. Young farmers who were in town for Saturday came tramping
      through the yard to the back door to engage dances, or to invite Tony to
      parties and picnics. Lena and Norwegian Anna dropped in to help her with
      her work, so that she could get away early. The boys who brought her home
      after the dances sometimes laughed at the back gate and wakened Mr.
      Harling from his first sleep. A crisis was inevitable.
    </p>
    <p>
      One Saturday night Mr. Harling had gone down to the cellar for beer. As he
      came up the stairs in the dark, he heard scuffling on the back porch, and
      then the sound of a vigorous slap. He looked out through the side door in
      time to see a pair of long legs vaulting over the picket fence. Antonia
      was standing there, angry and excited. Young Harry Paine, who was to marry
      his employer&rsquo;s daughter on Monday, had come to the tent with a crowd of
      friends and danced all evening. Afterward, he begged Antonia to let him
      walk home with her. She said she supposed he was a nice young man, as he
      was one of Miss Frances&rsquo;s friends, and she didn&rsquo;t mind. On the back porch
      he tried to kiss her, and when she protested&mdash;because he was going to
      be married on Monday&mdash;he caught her and kissed her until she got one
      hand free and slapped him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Harling put his beer-bottles down on the table. &lsquo;This is what I&rsquo;ve
      been expecting, Antonia. You&rsquo;ve been going with girls who have a
      reputation for being free and easy, and now you&rsquo;ve got the same
      reputation. I won&rsquo;t have this and that fellow tramping about my back yard
      all the time. This is the end of it, tonight. It stops, short. You can
      quit going to these dances, or you can hunt another place. Think it over.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      The next morning when Mrs. Harling and Frances tried to reason with
      Antonia, they found her agitated but determined. &lsquo;Stop going to the tent?&rsquo; 
      she panted. &lsquo;I wouldn&rsquo;t think of it for a minute! My own father couldn&rsquo;t
      make me stop! Mr. Harling ain&rsquo;t my boss outside my work. I won&rsquo;t give up
      my friends, either. The boys I go with are nice fellows. I thought Mr.
      Paine was all right, too, because he used to come here. I guess I gave him
      a red face for his wedding, all right!&rsquo; she blazed out indignantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;You&rsquo;ll have to do one thing or the other, Antonia,&rsquo; Mrs. Harling told her
      decidedly. &lsquo;I can&rsquo;t go back on what Mr. Harling has said. This is his
      house.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Then I&rsquo;ll just leave, Mrs. Harling. Lena&rsquo;s been wanting me to get a place
      closer to her for a long while. Mary Svoboda&rsquo;s going away from the
      Cutters&rsquo; to work at the hotel, and I can have her place.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Harling rose from her chair. &lsquo;Antonia, if you go to the Cutters&rsquo; to
      work, you cannot come back to this house again. You know what that man is.
      It will be the ruin of you.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Tony snatched up the teakettle and began to pour boiling water over the
      glasses, laughing excitedly. &lsquo;Oh, I can take care of myself! I&rsquo;m a lot
      stronger than Cutter is. They pay four dollars there, and there&rsquo;s no
      children. The work&rsquo;s nothing; I can have every evening, and be out a lot
      in the afternoons.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I thought you liked children. Tony, what&rsquo;s come over you?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I don&rsquo;t know, something has.&rsquo; Antonia tossed her head and set her jaw. &lsquo;A
      girl like me has got to take her good times when she can. Maybe there
      won&rsquo;t be any tent next year. I guess I want to have my fling, like the
      other girls.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Harling gave a short, harsh laugh. &lsquo;If you go to work for the
      Cutters, you&rsquo;re likely to have a fling that you won&rsquo;t get up from in a
      hurry.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Frances said, when she told grandmother and me about this scene, that
      every pan and plate and cup on the shelves trembled when her mother walked
      out of the kitchen. Mrs. Harling declared bitterly that she wished she had
      never let herself get fond of Antonia.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0033" id="link2H_4_0033">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
</section></body></html>