<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 36</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      XIII
    </h2>
    <p>
      I NOTICED ONE AFTERNOON that grandmother had been crying. Her feet seemed
      to drag as she moved about the house, and I got up from the table where I
      was studying and went to her, asking if she didn&rsquo;t feel well, and if I
      couldn&rsquo;t help her with her work.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;No, thank you, Jim. I&rsquo;m troubled, but I guess I&rsquo;m well enough. Getting a
      little rusty in the bones, maybe,&rsquo; she added bitterly.
    </p>
    <p>
      I stood hesitating. &lsquo;What are you fretting about, grandmother? Has
      grandfather lost any money?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;No, it ain&rsquo;t money. I wish it was. But I&rsquo;ve heard things. You must &lsquo;a&rsquo; 
      known it would come back to me sometime.&rsquo; She dropped into a chair, and,
      covering her face with her apron, began to cry. &lsquo;Jim,&rsquo; she said, &lsquo;I was
      never one that claimed old folks could bring up their grandchildren. But
      it came about so; there wasn&rsquo;t any other way for you, it seemed like.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      I put my arms around her. I couldn&rsquo;t bear to see her cry.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;What is it, grandmother? Is it the Firemen&rsquo;s dances?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      She nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I&rsquo;m sorry I sneaked off like that. But there&rsquo;s nothing wrong about the
      dances, and I haven&rsquo;t done anything wrong. I like all those country girls,
      and I like to dance with them. That&rsquo;s all there is to it.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;But it ain&rsquo;t right to deceive us, son, and it brings blame on us. People
      say you are growing up to be a bad boy, and that ain&rsquo;t just to us.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I don&rsquo;t care what they say about me, but if it hurts you, that settles
      it. I won&rsquo;t go to the Firemen&rsquo;s Hall again.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      I kept my promise, of course, but I found the spring months dull enough. I
      sat at home with the old people in the evenings now, reading Latin that
      was not in our high-school course. I had made up my mind to do a lot of
      college requirement work in the summer, and to enter the freshman class at
      the university without conditions in the fall. I wanted to get away as
      soon as possible.
    </p>
    <p>
      Disapprobation hurt me, I found&mdash;even that of people whom I did not
      admire. As the spring came on, I grew more and more lonely, and fell back
      on the telegrapher and the cigar-maker and his canaries for companionship.
      I remember I took a melancholy pleasure in hanging a May-basket for Nina
      Harling that spring. I bought the flowers from an old German woman who
      always had more window plants than anyone else, and spent an afternoon
      trimming a little workbasket. When dusk came on, and the new moon hung in
      the sky, I went quietly to the Harlings&rsquo; front door with my offering, rang
      the bell, and then ran away as was the custom. Through the willow hedge I
      could hear Nina&rsquo;s cries of delight, and I felt comforted.
    </p>
    <p>
      On those warm, soft spring evenings I often lingered downtown to walk home
      with Frances, and talked to her about my plans and about the reading I was
      doing. One evening she said she thought Mrs. Harling was not seriously
      offended with me.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Mama is as broad-minded as mothers ever are, I guess. But you know she
      was hurt about Antonia, and she can&rsquo;t understand why you like to be with
      Tiny and Lena better than with the girls of your own set.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Can you?&rsquo; I asked bluntly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Frances laughed. &lsquo;Yes, I think I can. You knew them in the country, and
      you like to take sides. In some ways you&rsquo;re older than boys of your age.
      It will be all right with mama after you pass your college examinations
      and she sees you&rsquo;re in earnest.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;If you were a boy,&rsquo; I persisted, &lsquo;you wouldn&rsquo;t belong to the Owl Club,
      either. You&rsquo;d be just like me.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      She shook her head. &lsquo;I would and I wouldn&rsquo;t. I expect I know the country
      girls better than you do. You always put a kind of glamour over them. The
      trouble with you, Jim, is that you&rsquo;re romantic. Mama&rsquo;s going to your
      Commencement. She asked me the other day if I knew what your oration is to
      be about. She wants you to do well.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      I thought my oration very good. It stated with fervour a great many things
      I had lately discovered. Mrs. Harling came to the Opera House to hear the
      Commencement exercises, and I looked at her most of the time while I made
      my speech. Her keen, intelligent eyes never left my face. Afterward she
      came back to the dressing-room where we stood, with our diplomas in our
      hands, walked up to me, and said heartily: &lsquo;You surprised me, Jim. I
      didn&rsquo;t believe you could do as well as that. You didn&rsquo;t get that speech
      out of books.&rsquo; Among my graduation presents there was a silk umbrella from
      Mrs. Harling, with my name on the handle.
    </p>
    <p>
      I walked home from the Opera House alone. As I passed the Methodist
      Church, I saw three white figures ahead of me, pacing up and down under
      the arching maple trees, where the moonlight filtered through the lush
      June foliage. They hurried toward me; they were waiting for me&mdash;Lena
      and Tony and Anna Hansen.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Oh, Jim, it was splendid!&rsquo; Tony was breathing hard, as she always did
      when her feelings outran her language. &lsquo;There ain&rsquo;t a lawyer in Black Hawk
      could make a speech like that. I just stopped your grandpa and said so to
      him. He won&rsquo;t tell you, but he told us he was awful surprised himself,
      didn&rsquo;t he, girls?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Lena sidled up to me and said teasingly, &lsquo;What made you so solemn? I
      thought you were scared. I was sure you&rsquo;d forget.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Anna spoke wistfully.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;It must make you very happy, Jim, to have fine thoughts like that in your
      mind all the time, and to have words to put them in. I always wanted to go
      to school, you know.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Oh, I just sat there and wished my papa could hear you! Jim&rsquo;&mdash;Antonia
      took hold of my coat lapels&mdash;&lsquo;there was something in your speech that
      made me think so about my papa!&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I thought about your papa when I wrote my speech, Tony,&rsquo; I said. &lsquo;I
      dedicated it to him.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      She threw her arms around me, and her dear face was all wet with tears.
    </p>
    <p>
      I stood watching their white dresses glimmer smaller and smaller down the
      sidewalk as they went away. I have had no other success that pulled at my
      heartstrings like that one.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0036" id="link2H_4_0036">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
</section></body></html>