<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      XVI
    </h2>
    <p>
      MR. SHIMERDA LAY DEAD in the barn four days, and on the fifth they buried
      him. All day Friday Jelinek was off with Ambrosch digging the grave,
      chopping out the frozen earth with old axes. On Saturday we breakfasted
      before daylight and got into the wagon with the coffin. Jake and Jelinek
      went ahead on horseback to cut the body loose from the pool of blood in
      which it was frozen fast to the ground.
    </p>
    <p>
      When grandmother and I went into the Shimerdas&rsquo; house, we found the
      womenfolk alone; Ambrosch and Marek were at the barn. Mrs. Shimerda sat
      crouching by the stove, Antonia was washing dishes. When she saw me, she
      ran out of her dark corner and threw her arms around me. &lsquo;Oh, Jimmy,&rsquo; she
      sobbed, &lsquo;what you tink for my lovely papa!&rsquo; It seemed to me that I could
      feel her heart breaking as she clung to me.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Shimerda, sitting on the stump by the stove, kept looking over her
      shoulder toward the door while the neighbours were arriving. They came on
      horseback, all except the postmaster, who brought his family in a wagon
      over the only broken wagon-trail. The Widow Steavens rode up from her farm
      eight miles down the Black Hawk road. The cold drove the women into the
      cave-house, and it was soon crowded. A fine, sleety snow was beginning to
      fall, and everyone was afraid of another storm and anxious to have the
      burial over with.
    </p>
    <p>
      Grandfather and Jelinek came to tell Mrs. Shimerda that it was time to
      start. After bundling her mother up in clothes the neighbours had brought,
      Antonia put on an old cape from our house and the rabbit-skin hat her
      father had made for her. Four men carried Mr. Shimerda&rsquo;s box up the hill;
      Krajiek slunk along behind them. The coffin was too wide for the door, so
      it was put down on the slope outside. I slipped out from the cave and
      looked at Mr. Shimerda. He was lying on his side, with his knees drawn up.
      His body was draped in a black shawl, and his head was bandaged in white
      muslin, like a mummy&rsquo;s; one of his long, shapely hands lay out on the
      black cloth; that was all one could see of him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Shimerda came out and placed an open prayer-book against the body,
      making the sign of the cross on the bandaged head with her fingers.
      Ambrosch knelt down and made the same gesture, and after him Antonia and
      Marek. Yulka hung back. Her mother pushed her forward, and kept saying
      something to her over and over. Yulka knelt down, shut her eyes, and put
      out her hand a little way, but she drew it back and began to cry wildly.
      She was afraid to touch the bandage. Mrs. Shimerda caught her by the
      shoulders and pushed her toward the coffin, but grandmother interfered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;No, Mrs. Shimerda,&rsquo; she said firmly, &lsquo;I won&rsquo;t stand by and see that child
      frightened into spasms. She is too little to understand what you want of
      her. Let her alone.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      At a look from grandfather, Fuchs and Jelinek placed the lid on the box,
      and began to nail it down over Mr. Shimerda. I was afraid to look at
      Antonia. She put her arms round Yulka and held the little girl close to
      her.
    </p>
    <p>
      The coffin was put into the wagon. We drove slowly away, against the fine,
      icy snow which cut our faces like a sand-blast. When we reached the grave,
      it looked a very little spot in that snow-covered waste. The men took the
      coffin to the edge of the hole and lowered it with ropes. We stood about
      watching them, and the powdery snow lay without melting on the caps and
      shoulders of the men and the shawls of the women. Jelinek spoke in a
      persuasive tone to Mrs. Shimerda, and then turned to grandfather.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;She says, Mr. Burden, she is very glad if you can make some prayer for
      him here in English, for the neighbours to understand.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Grandmother looked anxiously at grandfather. He took off his hat, and the
      other men did likewise. I thought his prayer remarkable. I still remember
      it. He began, &lsquo;Oh, great and just God, no man among us knows what the
      sleeper knows, nor is it for us to judge what lies between him and Thee.&rsquo; 
      He prayed that if any man there had been remiss toward the stranger come
      to a far country, God would forgive him and soften his heart. He recalled
      the promises to the widow and the fatherless, and asked God to smooth the
      way before this widow and her children, and to &lsquo;incline the hearts of men
      to deal justly with her.&rsquo; In closing, he said we were leaving Mr. Shimerda
      at &lsquo;Thy judgment seat, which is also Thy mercy seat.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      All the time he was praying, grandmother watched him through the black
      fingers of her glove, and when he said &lsquo;Amen,&rsquo; I thought she looked
      satisfied with him. She turned to Otto and whispered, &lsquo;Can&rsquo;t you start a
      hymn, Fuchs? It would seem less heathenish.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Fuchs glanced about to see if there was general approval of her
      suggestion, then began, &lsquo;Jesus, Lover of my Soul,&rsquo; and all the men and
      women took it up after him. Whenever I have heard the hymn since, it has
      made me remember that white waste and the little group of people; and the
      bluish air, full of fine, eddying snow, like long veils flying:
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;While the nearer waters roll, While the tempest still is high.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Years afterward, when the open-grazing days were over, and the red grass
      had been ploughed under and under until it had almost disappeared from the
      prairie; when all the fields were under fence, and the roads no longer ran
      about like wild things, but followed the surveyed section-lines, Mr.
      Shimerda&rsquo;s grave was still there, with a sagging wire fence around it, and
      an unpainted wooden cross. As grandfather had predicted, Mrs. Shimerda
      never saw the roads going over his head. The road from the north curved a
      little to the east just there, and the road from the west swung out a
      little to the south; so that the grave, with its tall red grass that was
      never mowed, was like a little island; and at twilight, under a new moon
      or the clear evening star, the dusty roads used to look like soft grey
      rivers flowing past it. I never came upon the place without emotion, and
      in all that country it was the spot most dear to me. I loved the dim
      superstition, the propitiatory intent, that had put the grave there; and
      still more I loved the spirit that could not carry out the sentence&mdash;the
      error from the surveyed lines, the clemency of the soft earth roads along
      which the home-coming wagons rattled after sunset. Never a tired driver
      passed the wooden cross, I am sure, without wishing well to the sleeper.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0019" id="link2H_4_0019">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
</section></body></html>