<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 41</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-41" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      II
    </h2>
    <p>
      ONE MARCH EVENING in my sophomore year I was sitting alone in my room
      after supper. There had been a warm thaw all day, with mushy yards and
      little streams of dark water gurgling cheerfully into the streets out of
      old snow-banks. My window was open, and the earthy wind blowing through
      made me indolent. On the edge of the prairie, where the sun had gone down,
      the sky was turquoise blue, like a lake, with gold light throbbing in it.
      Higher up, in the utter clarity of the western slope, the evening star
      hung like a lamp suspended by silver chains&mdash;like the lamp engraved
      upon the title-page of old Latin texts, which is always appearing in new
      heavens, and waking new desires in men. It reminded me, at any rate, to
      shut my window and light my wick in answer. I did so regretfully, and the
      dim objects in the room emerged from the shadows and took their place
      about me with the helpfulness which custom breeds.
    </p>
    <p>
      I propped my book open and stared listlessly at the page of the &lsquo;Georgics&rsquo; 
      where tomorrow&rsquo;s lesson began. It opened with the melancholy reflection
      that, in the lives of mortals the best days are the first to flee. &lsquo;Optima
      dies... prima fugit.&rsquo; I turned back to the beginning of the third book,
      which we had read in class that morning. &lsquo;Primus ego in patriam mecum...
      deducam Musas&rsquo;; &lsquo;for I shall be the first, if I live, to bring the Muse
      into my country.&rsquo; Cleric had explained to us that &lsquo;patria&rsquo; here meant, not
      a nation or even a province, but the little rural neighbourhood on the
      Mincio where the poet was born. This was not a boast, but a hope, at once
      bold and devoutly humble, that he might bring the Muse (but lately come to
      Italy from her cloudy Grecian mountains), not to the capital, the palatia
      Romana, but to his own little I country&rsquo;; to his father&rsquo;s fields, &lsquo;sloping
      down to the river and to the old beech trees with broken tops.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Cleric said he thought Virgil, when he was dying at Brindisi, must have
      remembered that passage. After he had faced the bitter fact that he was to
      leave the &lsquo;Aeneid&rsquo; unfinished, and had decreed that the great canvas,
      crowded with figures of gods and men, should be burned rather than survive
      him unperfected, then his mind must have gone back to the perfect
      utterance of the &lsquo;Georgics,&rsquo; where the pen was fitted to the matter as the
      plough is to the furrow; and he must have said to himself, with the
      thankfulness of a good man, &lsquo;I was the first to bring the Muse into my
      country.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      We left the classroom quietly, conscious that we had been brushed by the
      wing of a great feeling, though perhaps I alone knew Cleric intimately
      enough to guess what that feeling was. In the evening, as I sat staring at
      my book, the fervour of his voice stirred through the quantities on the
      page before me. I was wondering whether that particular rocky strip of New
      England coast about which he had so often told me was Cleric&rsquo;s patria.
      Before I had got far with my reading, I was disturbed by a knock. I
      hurried to the door and when I opened it saw a woman standing in the dark
      hall.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I expect you hardly know me, Jim.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      The voice seemed familiar, but I did not recognize her until she stepped
      into the light of my doorway and I beheld&mdash;Lena Lingard! She was so
      quietly conventionalized by city clothes that I might have passed her on
      the street without seeing her. Her black suit fitted her figure smoothly,
      and a black lace hat, with pale-blue forget-me-nots, sat demurely on her
      yellow hair.
    </p>
    <p>
      I led her toward Cleric&rsquo;s chair, the only comfortable one I had,
      questioning her confusedly.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was not disconcerted by my embarrassment. She looked about her with
      the naive curiosity I remembered so well. &lsquo;You are quite comfortable here,
      aren&rsquo;t you? I live in Lincoln now, too, Jim. I&rsquo;m in business for myself. I
      have a dressmaking shop in the Raleigh Block, out on O Street. I&rsquo;ve made a
      real good start.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;But, Lena, when did you come?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Oh, I&rsquo;ve been here all winter. Didn&rsquo;t your grandmother ever write you?
      I&rsquo;ve thought about looking you up lots of times. But we&rsquo;ve all heard what
      a studious young man you&rsquo;ve got to be, and I felt bashful. I didn&rsquo;t know
      whether you&rsquo;d be glad to see me.&rsquo; She laughed her mellow, easy laugh, that
      was either very artless or very comprehending, one never quite knew which.
      &lsquo;You seem the same, though&mdash;except you&rsquo;re a young man, now, of
      course. Do you think I&rsquo;ve changed?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Maybe you&rsquo;re prettier&mdash;though you were always pretty enough. Perhaps
      it&rsquo;s your clothes that make a difference.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;You like my new suit? I have to dress pretty well in my business.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      She took off her jacket and sat more at ease in her blouse, of some soft,
      flimsy silk. She was already at home in my place, had slipped quietly into
      it, as she did into everything. She told me her business was going well,
      and she had saved a little money.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;This summer I&rsquo;m going to build the house for mother I&rsquo;ve talked about so
      long. I won&rsquo;t be able to pay up on it at first, but I want her to have it
      before she is too old to enjoy it. Next summer I&rsquo;ll take her down new
      furniture and carpets, so she&rsquo;ll have something to look forward to all
      winter.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      I watched Lena sitting there so smooth and sunny and well-cared-for, and
      thought of how she used to run barefoot over the prairie until after the
      snow began to fly, and how Crazy Mary chased her round and round the
      cornfields. It seemed to me wonderful that she should have got on so well
      in the world. Certainly she had no one but herself to thank for it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;You must feel proud of yourself, Lena,&rsquo; I said heartily. &lsquo;Look at me;
      I&rsquo;ve never earned a dollar, and I don&rsquo;t know that I&rsquo;ll ever be able to.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Tony says you&rsquo;re going to be richer than Mr. Harling some day. She&rsquo;s
      always bragging about you, you know.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Tell me, how IS Tony?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;She&rsquo;s fine. She works for Mrs. Gardener at the hotel now. She&rsquo;s
      housekeeper. Mrs. Gardener&rsquo;s health isn&rsquo;t what it was, and she can&rsquo;t see
      after everything like she used to. She has great confidence in Tony.
      Tony&rsquo;s made it up with the Harlings, too. Little Nina is so fond of her
      that Mrs. Harling kind of overlooked things.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Is she still going with Larry Donovan?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Oh, that&rsquo;s on, worse than ever! I guess they&rsquo;re engaged. Tony talks about
      him like he was president of the railroad. Everybody laughs about it,
      because she was never a girl to be soft. She won&rsquo;t hear a word against
      him. She&rsquo;s so sort of innocent.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      I said I didn&rsquo;t like Larry, and never would.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lena&rsquo;s face dimpled. &lsquo;Some of us could tell her things, but it wouldn&rsquo;t do
      any good. She&rsquo;d always believe him. That&rsquo;s Antonia&rsquo;s failing, you know; if
      she once likes people, she won&rsquo;t hear anything against them.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I think I&rsquo;d better go home and look after Antonia,&rsquo; I said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I think you had.&rsquo; Lena looked up at me in frank amusement. &lsquo;It&rsquo;s a good
      thing the Harlings are friendly with her again. Larry&rsquo;s afraid of them.
      They ship so much grain, they have influence with the railroad people.
      What are you studying?&rsquo; She leaned her elbows on the table and drew my
      book toward her. I caught a faint odour of violet sachet. &lsquo;So that&rsquo;s
      Latin, is it? It looks hard. You do go to the theatre sometimes, though,
      for I&rsquo;ve seen you there. Don&rsquo;t you just love a good play, Jim? I can&rsquo;t
      stay at home in the evening if there&rsquo;s one in town. I&rsquo;d be willing to work
      like a slave, it seems to me, to live in a place where there are
      theatres.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Let&rsquo;s go to a show together sometime. You are going to let me come to see
      you, aren&rsquo;t you?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Would you like to? I&rsquo;d be ever so pleased. I&rsquo;m never busy after six
      o&rsquo;clock, and I let my sewing girls go at half-past five. I board, to save
      time, but sometimes I cook a chop for myself, and I&rsquo;d be glad to cook one
      for you. Well&rsquo;&mdash;she began to put on her white gloves&mdash;&lsquo;it&rsquo;s been
      awful good to see you, Jim.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;You needn&rsquo;t hurry, need you? You&rsquo;ve hardly told me anything yet.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;We can talk when you come to see me. I expect you don&rsquo;t often have lady
      visitors. The old woman downstairs didn&rsquo;t want to let me come up very
      much. I told her I was from your home town, and had promised your
      grandmother to come and see you. How surprised Mrs. Burden would be!&rsquo; Lena
      laughed softly as she rose.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I caught up my hat, she shook her head. &lsquo;No, I don&rsquo;t want you to go
      with me. I&rsquo;m to meet some Swedes at the drugstore. You wouldn&rsquo;t care for
      them. I wanted to see your room so I could write Tony all about it, but I
      must tell her how I left you right here with your books. She&rsquo;s always so
      afraid someone will run off with you!&rsquo; Lena slipped her silk sleeves into
      the jacket I held for her, smoothed it over her person, and buttoned it
      slowly. I walked with her to the door. &lsquo;Come and see me sometimes when
      you&rsquo;re lonesome. But maybe you have all the friends you want. Have you?&rsquo; 
      She turned her soft cheek to me. &lsquo;Have you?&rsquo; she whispered teasingly in my
      ear. In a moment I watched her fade down the dusky stairway.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I turned back to my room the place seemed much pleasanter than
      before. Lena had left something warm and friendly in the lamplight. How I
      loved to hear her laugh again! It was so soft and unexcited and
      appreciative gave a favourable interpretation to everything. When I closed
      my eyes I could hear them all laughing&mdash;the Danish laundry girls and
      the three Bohemian Marys. Lena had brought them all back to me. It came
      over me, as it had never done before, the relation between girls like
      those and the poetry of Virgil. If there were no girls like them in the
      world, there would be no poetry. I understood that clearly, for the first
      time. This revelation seemed to me inestimably precious. I clung to it as
      if it might suddenly vanish.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I sat down to my book at last, my old dream about Lena coming across
      the harvest-field in her short skirt seemed to me like the memory of an
      actual experience. It floated before me on the page like a picture, and
      underneath it stood the mournful line: &lsquo;Optima dies... prima fugit.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0041" id="link2H_4_0041">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
</section></body></html>