<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 35</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      XII
    </h2>
    <p>
      AFTER ANTONIA WENT TO live with the Cutters, she seemed to care about
      nothing but picnics and parties and having a good time. When she was not
      going to a dance, she sewed until midnight. Her new clothes were the
      subject of caustic comment. Under Lena&rsquo;s direction she copied Mrs.
      Gardener&rsquo;s new party dress and Mrs. Smith&rsquo;s street costume so ingeniously
      in cheap materials that those ladies were greatly annoyed, and Mrs.
      Cutter, who was jealous of them, was secretly pleased.
    </p>
    <p>
      Tony wore gloves now, and high-heeled shoes and feathered bonnets, and she
      went downtown nearly every afternoon with Tiny and Lena and the Marshalls&rsquo; 
      Norwegian Anna. We high-school boys used to linger on the playground at
      the afternoon recess to watch them as they came tripping down the hill
      along the board sidewalk, two and two. They were growing prettier every
      day, but as they passed us, I used to think with pride that Antonia, like
      Snow-White in the fairy tale, was still &lsquo;fairest of them all.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Being a senior now, I got away from school early. Sometimes I overtook the
      girls downtown and coaxed them into the ice-cream parlour, where they
      would sit chattering and laughing, telling me all the news from the
      country.
    </p>
    <p>
      I remember how angry Tiny Soderball made me one afternoon. She declared
      she had heard grandmother was going to make a Baptist preacher of me. &lsquo;I
      guess you&rsquo;ll have to stop dancing and wear a white necktie then. Won&rsquo;t he
      look funny, girls?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Lena laughed. &lsquo;You&rsquo;ll have to hurry up, Jim. If you&rsquo;re going to be a
      preacher, I want you to marry me. You must promise to marry us all, and
      then baptize the babies.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Norwegian Anna, always dignified, looked at her reprovingly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Baptists don&rsquo;t believe in christening babies, do they, Jim?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      I told her I didn&rsquo;t know what they believed, and didn&rsquo;t care, and that I
      certainly wasn&rsquo;t going to be a preacher.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;That&rsquo;s too bad,&rsquo; Tiny simpered. She was in a teasing mood. &lsquo;You&rsquo;d make
      such a good one. You&rsquo;re so studious. Maybe you&rsquo;d like to be a professor.
      You used to teach Tony, didn&rsquo;t you?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      Antonia broke in. &lsquo;I&rsquo;ve set my heart on Jim being a doctor. You&rsquo;d be good
      with sick people, Jim. Your grandmother&rsquo;s trained you up so nice. My papa
      always said you were an awful smart boy.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      I said I was going to be whatever I pleased. &lsquo;Won&rsquo;t you be surprised, Miss
      Tiny, if I turn out to be a regular devil of a fellow?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      They laughed until a glance from Norwegian Anna checked them; the
      high-school principal had just come into the front part of the shop to buy
      bread for supper. Anna knew the whisper was going about that I was a sly
      one. People said there must be something queer about a boy who showed no
      interest in girls of his own age, but who could be lively enough when he
      was with Tony and Lena or the three Marys.
    </p>
    <p>
      The enthusiasm for the dance, which the Vannis had kindled, did not at
      once die out. After the tent left town, the Euchre Club became the Owl
      Club, and gave dances in the Masonic Hall once a week. I was invited to
      join, but declined. I was moody and restless that winter, and tired of the
      people I saw every day. Charley Harling was already at Annapolis, while I
      was still sitting in Black Hawk, answering to my name at roll-call every
      morning, rising from my desk at the sound of a bell and marching out like
      the grammar-school children. Mrs. Harling was a little cool toward me,
      because I continued to champion Antonia. What was there for me to do after
      supper? Usually I had learned next day&rsquo;s lessons by the time I left the
      school building, and I couldn&rsquo;t sit still and read forever.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the evening I used to prowl about, hunting for diversion. There lay the
      familiar streets, frozen with snow or liquid with mud. They led to the
      houses of good people who were putting the babies to bed, or simply
      sitting still before the parlour stove, digesting their supper. Black Hawk
      had two saloons. One of them was admitted, even by the church people, to
      be as respectable as a saloon could be. Handsome Anton Jelinek, who had
      rented his homestead and come to town, was the proprietor. In his saloon
      there were long tables where the Bohemian and German farmers could eat the
      lunches they brought from home while they drank their beer. Jelinek kept
      rye bread on hand and smoked fish and strong imported cheeses to please
      the foreign palate. I liked to drop into his bar-room and listen to the
      talk. But one day he overtook me on the street and clapped me on the
      shoulder.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Jim,&rsquo; he said, &lsquo;I am good friends with you and I always like to see you.
      But you know how the church people think about saloons. Your grandpa has
      always treated me fine, and I don&rsquo;t like to have you come into my place,
      because I know he don&rsquo;t like it, and it puts me in bad with him.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      So I was shut out of that.
    </p>
    <p>
      One could hang about the drugstore; and listen to the old men who sat
      there every evening, talking politics and telling raw stories. One could
      go to the cigar factory and chat with the old German who raised canaries
      for sale, and look at his stuffed birds. But whatever you began with him,
      the talk went back to taxidermy. There was the depot, of course; I often
      went down to see the night train come in, and afterward sat awhile with
      the disconsolate telegrapher who was always hoping to be transferred to
      Omaha or Denver, &lsquo;where there was some life.&rsquo; He was sure to bring out his
      pictures of actresses and dancers. He got them with cigarette coupons, and
      nearly smoked himself to death to possess these desired forms and faces.
      For a change, one could talk to the station agent; but he was another
      malcontent; spent all his spare time writing letters to officials
      requesting a transfer. He wanted to get back to Wyoming where he could go
      trout-fishing on Sundays. He used to say &lsquo;there was nothing in life for
      him but trout streams, ever since he&rsquo;d lost his twins.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      These were the distractions I had to choose from. There were no other
      lights burning downtown after nine o&rsquo;clock. On starlight nights I used to
      pace up and down those long, cold streets, scowling at the little,
      sleeping houses on either side, with their storm-windows and covered back
      porches. They were flimsy shelters, most of them poorly built of light
      wood, with spindle porch-posts horribly mutilated by the turning-lathe.
      Yet for all their frailness, how much jealousy and envy and unhappiness
      some of them managed to contain! The life that went on in them seemed to
      me made up of evasions and negations; shifts to save cooking, to save
      washing and cleaning, devices to propitiate the tongue of gossip. This
      guarded mode of existence was like living under a tyranny. People&rsquo;s
      speech, their voices, their very glances, became furtive and repressed.
      Every individual taste, every natural appetite, was bridled by caution.
      The people asleep in those houses, I thought, tried to live like the mice
      in their own kitchens; to make no noise, to leave no trace, to slip over
      the surface of things in the dark. The growing piles of ashes and cinders
      in the back yards were the only evidence that the wasteful, consuming
      process of life went on at all. On Tuesday nights the Owl Club danced;
      then there was a little stir in the streets, and here and there one could
      see a lighted window until midnight. But the next night all was dark
      again.
    </p>
    <p>
      After I refused to join &lsquo;the Owls,&rsquo; as they were called, I made a bold
      resolve to go to the Saturday night dances at Firemen&rsquo;s Hall. I knew it
      would be useless to acquaint my elders with any such plan. Grandfather
      didn&rsquo;t approve of dancing, anyway; he would only say that if I wanted to
      dance I could go to the Masonic Hall, among &lsquo;the people we knew.&rsquo; It was
      just my point that I saw altogether too much of the people we knew.
    </p>
    <p>
      My bedroom was on the ground floor, and as I studied there, I had a stove
      in it. I used to retire to my room early on Saturday night, change my
      shirt and collar and put on my Sunday coat. I waited until all was quiet
      and the old people were asleep, then raised my window, climbed out, and
      went softly through the yard. The first time I deceived my grandparents I
      felt rather shabby, perhaps even the second time, but I soon ceased to
      think about it.
    </p>
    <p>
      The dance at the Firemen&rsquo;s Hall was the one thing I looked forward to all
      the week. There I met the same people I used to see at the Vannis&rsquo; tent.
      Sometimes there were Bohemians from Wilber, or German boys who came down
      on the afternoon freight from Bismarck. Tony and Lena and Tiny were always
      there, and the three Bohemian Marys, and the Danish laundry girls.
    </p>
    <p>
      The four Danish girls lived with the laundryman and his wife in their
      house behind the laundry, with a big garden where the clothes were hung
      out to dry. The laundryman was a kind, wise old fellow, who paid his girls
      well, looked out for them, and gave them a good home. He told me once that
      his own daughter died just as she was getting old enough to help her
      mother, and that he had been &lsquo;trying to make up for it ever since.&rsquo; On
      summer afternoons he used to sit for hours on the sidewalk in front of his
      laundry, his newspaper lying on his knee, watching his girls through the
      big open window while they ironed and talked in Danish. The clouds of
      white dust that blew up the street, the gusts of hot wind that withered
      his vegetable garden, never disturbed his calm. His droll expression
      seemed to say that he had found the secret of contentment. Morning and
      evening he drove about in his spring wagon, distributing freshly ironed
      clothes, and collecting bags of linen that cried out for his suds and
      sunny drying-lines. His girls never looked so pretty at the dances as they
      did standing by the ironing-board, or over the tubs, washing the fine
      pieces, their white arms and throats bare, their cheeks bright as the
      brightest wild roses, their gold hair moist with the steam or the heat and
      curling in little damp spirals about their ears. They had not learned much
      English, and were not so ambitious as Tony or Lena; but they were kind,
      simple girls and they were always happy. When one danced with them, one
      smelled their clean, freshly ironed clothes that had been put away with
      rosemary leaves from Mr. Jensen&rsquo;s garden.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were never girls enough to go round at those dances, but everyone
      wanted a turn with Tony and Lena.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lena moved without exertion, rather indolently, and her hand often
      accented the rhythm softly on her partner&rsquo;s shoulder. She smiled if one
      spoke to her, but seldom answered. The music seemed to put her into a
      soft, waking dream, and her violet-coloured eyes looked sleepily and
      confidingly at one from under her long lashes. When she sighed she exhaled
      a heavy perfume of sachet powder. To dance &lsquo;Home, Sweet Home,&rsquo; with Lena
      was like coming in with the tide. She danced every dance like a waltz, and
      it was always the same waltz&mdash;the waltz of coming home to something,
      of inevitable, fated return. After a while one got restless under it, as
      one does under the heat of a soft, sultry summer day.
    </p>
    <p>
      When you spun out into the floor with Tony, you didn&rsquo;t return to anything.
      You set out every time upon a new adventure. I liked to schottische with
      her; she had so much spring and variety, and was always putting in new
      steps and slides. She taught me to dance against and around the
      hard-and-fast beat of the music. If, instead of going to the end of the
      railroad, old Mr. Shimerda had stayed in New York and picked up a living
      with his fiddle, how different Antonia&rsquo;s life might have been!
    </p>
    <p>
      Antonia often went to the dances with Larry Donovan, a passenger conductor
      who was a kind of professional ladies&rsquo; man, as we said. I remember how
      admiringly all the boys looked at her the night she first wore her
      velveteen dress, made like Mrs. Gardener&rsquo;s black velvet. She was lovely to
      see, with her eyes shining, and her lips always a little parted when she
      danced. That constant, dark colour in her cheeks never changed.
    </p>
    <p>
      One evening when Donovan was out on his run, Antonia came to the hall with
      Norwegian Anna and her young man, and that night I took her home. When we
      were in the Cutters&rsquo; yard, sheltered by the evergreens, I told her she
      must kiss me good night.
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Why, sure, Jim.&rsquo; A moment later she drew her face away and whispered
      indignantly, &lsquo;Why, Jim! You know you ain&rsquo;t right to kiss me like that.
      I&rsquo;ll tell your grandmother on you!&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Lena Lingard lets me kiss her,&rsquo; I retorted, &lsquo;and I&rsquo;m not half as fond of
      her as I am of you.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;Lena does?&rsquo; Tony gasped. &lsquo;If she&rsquo;s up to any of her nonsense with you,
      I&rsquo;ll scratch her eyes out!&rsquo; She took my arm again and we walked out of the
      gate and up and down the sidewalk. &lsquo;Now, don&rsquo;t you go and be a fool like
      some of these town boys. You&rsquo;re not going to sit around here and whittle
      store-boxes and tell stories all your life. You are going away to school
      and make something of yourself. I&rsquo;m just awful proud of you. You won&rsquo;t go
      and get mixed up with the Swedes, will you?&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &lsquo;I don&rsquo;t care anything about any of them but you,&rsquo; I said. &lsquo;And you&rsquo;ll
      always treat me like a kid, suppose.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      She laughed and threw her arms around me. &lsquo;I expect I will, but you&rsquo;re a
      kid I&rsquo;m awful fond of, anyhow! You can like me all you want to, but if I
      see you hanging round with Lena much, I&rsquo;ll go to your grandmother, as sure
      as your name&rsquo;s Jim Burden! Lena&rsquo;s all right, only&mdash;well, you know
      yourself she&rsquo;s soft that way. She can&rsquo;t help it. It&rsquo;s natural to her.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      If she was proud of me, I was so proud of her that I carried my head high
      as I emerged from the dark cedars and shut the Cutters&rsquo; gate softly behind
      me. Her warm, sweet face, her kind arms, and the true heart in her; she
      was, oh, she was still my Antonia! I looked with contempt at the dark,
      silent little houses about me as I walked home, and thought of the stupid
      young men who were asleep in some of them. I knew where the real women
      were, though I was only a boy; and I would not be afraid of them, either!
    </p>
    <p>
      I hated to enter the still house when I went home from the dances, and it
      was long before I could get to sleep. Toward morning I used to have
      pleasant dreams: sometimes Tony and I were out in the country, sliding
      down straw-stacks as we used to do; climbing up the yellow mountains over
      and over, and slipping down the smooth sides into soft piles of chaff.
    </p>
    <p>
      One dream I dreamed a great many times, and it was always the same. I was
      in a harvest-field full of shocks, and I was lying against one of them.
      Lena Lingard came across the stubble barefoot, in a short skirt, with a
      curved reaping-hook in her hand, and she was flushed like the dawn, with a
      kind of luminous rosiness all about her. She sat down beside me, turned to
      me with a soft sigh and said, &lsquo;Now they are all gone, and I can kiss you
      as much as I like.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      I used to wish I could have this flattering dream about Antonia, but I
      never did.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0035" id="link2H_4_0035">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
</section></body></html>