<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      INTRODUCTION
    </h2>
    <p>
      LAST summer I happened to be crossing the plains of Iowa in a season of
      intense heat, and it was my good fortune to have for a traveling companion
      James Quayle Burden&mdash;Jim Burden, as we still call him in the West. He
      and I are old friends&mdash;we grew up together in the same Nebraska town&mdash;and
      we had much to say to each other. While the train flashed through
      never-ending miles of ripe wheat, by country towns and bright-flowered
      pastures and oak groves wilting in the sun, we sat in the observation car,
      where the woodwork was hot to the touch and red dust lay deep over
      everything. The dust and heat, the burning wind, reminded us of many
      things. We were talking about what it is like to spend one&rsquo;s childhood in
      little towns like these, buried in wheat and corn, under stimulating
      extremes of climate: burning summers when the world lies green and billowy
      beneath a brilliant sky, when one is fairly stifled in vegetation, in the
      color and smell of strong weeds and heavy harvests; blustery winters with
      little snow, when the whole country is stripped bare and gray as
      sheet-iron. We agreed that no one who had not grown up in a little prairie
      town could know anything about it. It was a kind of freemasonry, we said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Although Jim Burden and I both live in New York, and are old friends, I do
      not see much of him there. He is legal counsel for one of the great
      Western railways, and is sometimes away from his New York office for weeks
      together. That is one reason why we do not often meet. Another is that I
      do not like his wife.
    </p>
    <p>
      When Jim was still an obscure young lawyer, struggling to make his way in
      New York, his career was suddenly advanced by a brilliant marriage.
      Genevieve Whitney was the only daughter of a distinguished man. Her
      marriage with young Burden was the subject of sharp comment at the time.
      It was said she had been brutally jilted by her cousin, Rutland Whitney,
      and that she married this unknown man from the West out of bravado. She
      was a restless, headstrong girl, even then, who liked to astonish her
      friends. Later, when I knew her, she was always doing something
      unexpected. She gave one of her town houses for a Suffrage headquarters,
      produced one of her own plays at the Princess Theater, was arrested for
      picketing during a garment-makers&rsquo; strike, etc. I am never able to believe
      that she has much feeling for the causes to which she lends her name and
      her fleeting interest. She is handsome, energetic, executive, but to me
      she seems unimpressionable and temperamentally incapable of enthusiasm.
      Her husband&rsquo;s quiet tastes irritate her, I think, and she finds it worth
      while to play the patroness to a group of young poets and painters of
      advanced ideas and mediocre ability. She has her own fortune and lives her
      own life. For some reason, she wishes to remain Mrs. James Burden.
    </p>
    <p>
      As for Jim, no disappointments have been severe enough to chill his
      naturally romantic and ardent disposition. This disposition, though it
      often made him seem very funny when he was a boy, has been one of the
      strongest elements in his success. He loves with a personal passion the
      great country through which his railway runs and branches. His faith in it
      and his knowledge of it have played an important part in its development.
      He is always able to raise capital for new enterprises in Wyoming or
      Montana, and has helped young men out there to do remarkable things in
      mines and timber and oil. If a young man with an idea can once get Jim
      Burden&rsquo;s attention, can manage to accompany him when he goes off into the
      wilds hunting for lost parks or exploring new canyons, then the money
      which means action is usually forthcoming. Jim is still able to lose
      himself in those big Western dreams. Though he is over forty now, he meets
      new people and new enterprises with the impulsiveness by which his boyhood
      friends remember him. He never seems to me to grow older. His fresh color
      and sandy hair and quick-changing blue eyes are those of a young man, and
      his sympathetic, solicitous interest in women is as youthful as it is
      Western and American.
    </p>
    <p>
      During that burning day when we were crossing Iowa, our talk kept
      returning to a central figure, a Bohemian girl whom we had known long ago
      and whom both of us admired. More than any other person we remembered,
      this girl seemed to mean to us the country, the conditions, the whole
      adventure of our childhood. To speak her name was to call up pictures of
      people and places, to set a quiet drama going in one&rsquo;s brain. I had lost
      sight of her altogether, but Jim had found her again after long years, had
      renewed a friendship that meant a great deal to him, and out of his busy
      life had set apart time enough to enjoy that friendship. His mind was full
      of her that day. He made me see her again, feel her presence, revived all
      my old affection for her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t see,&rdquo; he said impetuously, &ldquo;why you have never written anything
      about Antonia.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      I told him I had always felt that other people&mdash;he himself, for one
      knew her much better than I. I was ready, however, to make an agreement
      with him; I would set down on paper all that I remembered of Antonia if he
      would do the same. We might, in this way, get a picture of her.
    </p>
    <p>
      He rumpled his hair with a quick, excited gesture, which with him often
      announces a new determination, and I could see that my suggestion took
      hold of him. &ldquo;Maybe I will, maybe I will!&rdquo; he declared. He stared out of
      the window for a few moments, and when he turned to me again his eyes had
      the sudden clearness that comes from something the mind itself sees. &ldquo;Of
      course,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;I should have to do it in a direct way, and say a great
      deal about myself. It&rsquo;s through myself that I knew and felt her, and I&rsquo;ve
      had no practice in any other form of presentation.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      I told him that how he knew her and felt her was exactly what I most
      wanted to know about Antonia. He had had opportunities that I, as a little
      girl who watched her come and go, had not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Months afterward Jim Burden arrived at my apartment one stormy winter
      afternoon, with a bulging legal portfolio sheltered under his fur
      overcoat. He brought it into the sitting-room with him and tapped it with
      some pride as he stood warming his hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I finished it last night&mdash;the thing about Antonia,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Now,
      what about yours?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      I had to confess that mine had not gone beyond a few straggling notes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Notes? I didn&rsquo;t make any.&rdquo; He drank his tea all at once and put down the
      cup. &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t arrange or rearrange. I simply wrote down what of herself
      and myself and other people Antonia&rsquo;s name recalls to me. I suppose it
      hasn&rsquo;t any form. It hasn&rsquo;t any title, either.&rdquo; He went into the next room,
      sat down at my desk and wrote on the pinkish face of the portfolio the
      word, &ldquo;Antonia.&rdquo; He frowned at this a moment, then prefixed another word,
      making it &ldquo;My Antonia.&rdquo; That seemed to satisfy him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Read it as soon as you can,&rdquo; he said, rising, &ldquo;but don&rsquo;t let it influence
      your own story.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      My own story was never written, but the following narrative is Jim&rsquo;s
      manuscript, substantially as he brought it to me.
    </p>
    <p>
      NOTE: The Bohemian name Antonia is strongly accented on the first
      syllable, like the English name Anthony, and the &lsquo;i&rsquo; is, of course, given
      the sound of long &lsquo;e&rsquo;. The name is pronounced An&rsquo;-ton-ee-ah.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0002" id="link2H_4_0002">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
</section></body></html>